Vuk’uzenzele GENERALMEC Dhlomo expressed his heartfelt gratitude to President Ramaphosa for the stimulus pack age, saying that its benefi  ciaries will be the vast majority of the population who rely on the State for their health needs – particularly those in far-fl  ung areas.
“Today, there are 300 families who have breadwinners. These nurses have brought tears of joy." Dr Dhlomo said the nurses have been sitting at home for over 14 years.
"These are the nurses who are at the bottom of the ladder of the nursing profession, but they mean so much to our people.""We hope by injecting 300 new nurses into the system, we’re going to bring meaning in terms of quality of service to our people.”
From page 1 With just a click of a button, South Africans will now be able to apply for government jobs online. KwaZulu-Natal Health MEC, Dr Sibongiseni Dhlomo, comforts new nurse Nompumelelo Majola, whose mother recently passed away.2
February 2019 Edition 1Tel: (+27) 12 473 0089 E-mail: vukuzenzele@gcis.gov.zaAddress: Private Bag X745,  Pretoria, 0001Head of Editorial and ProductionTasneem Carrim  |  tasneem@gcis.gov.zaEditor-in-ChiefRoze Moodley | roze@gcis.gov.zaManaging EditorOngezwa Mogotsi ongezwa@gcis.gov.zaNews Editor Noluthando MotswaiWritersMore MatshedisoJauhara KhanSenior Designer Tendai Gonese Language PractitionersNomgcibelo Motha Boitumelo PhalatsePhakamani Dadlanais published by Government Communications (GCIS)Vuk’uzenzeleAll rights reserved.  Reproduction of the newspaper in whole or in part without  written  permission is strictly prohibited.
Distributed by: Printed by:THROUGH THE launch of e-Recruitment, government has demonstrated its commitment to uplifting the lives of youth and graduates.
ob seekers will soon be able to apply for government jobs online.
This, through the e-Recruitment system that was launched by Public Service and Administration Minister Ayanda Dlodlo, recently.
The Minister said the e-Recruitment system is being phased in, starting with the Department of Public Service and Administra-tion (DPSA) and will soon be rolled out to the entire public service.
“The e-Recruitment system is part of a government-wide process to make it simpler and easier for people, especially the youth, to apply for job opportunities in the public service.
“The process will also include a review of regulations for all entry level posts in the public service to allow the recruitment of new entrants without prior experience into entry level jobs,” Minister Dlodlo said.
She said it is indisputable that the current recruitment processes are cumbersome for job-seekers and government departments have not moved or evolved with the changing technological advancements.
“For job-seekers, the new e-Recruitment system will be benefi  cial because it is web based and accessible from diff  erent locations for all job seekers who submit applications to a centralised database,” she said.
The Minister said the system will enable the applicants to post their CVs and supporting documents once and the process will save them the cost of making multiple copies for applications.
“It is important to stress that applications for jobs in the Public Service will still be accepted through the physical Z83 forms to accommodate those who do not have access to the internet and will also be available in an online digital format to allow for a quick and easy application process for those who have internet,” she said.
The Minister said a benefi  t for government departments is that the system allows them to advertise posts electronically and therefore reduces the cost of current methods of advertising in newspapers.
This innovative process is a collaborative eff  ort between the Department of Public Service and Administration and the Gauteng Department of e-Government.
The Gauteng Department of e-Government provides the required resources to operate the system, while the State Information Technology Agency is partnering on the provision of technical and infrastructure development skills.