Vuk’uzenzeleTel: 012 473 0089 Email: vukuzenzele@gcis.gov.zaAddress: Private Bag X745,  Pretoria, 0001Head of Editorial and Production  Tasneem Carrim  |  tasneem@gcis.gov.zaEditor-in-ChiefElias Tibane | elias@gcis.gov.zaManaging EditorOngezwa Mogotsi ongezwa@gcis.gov.zaNews Editor Noluthando Motswai Writers  More Matshediso, Jauhara KhanSilusapho NyandaSenior DesignerTendai Gonese Language Practitioners  Nomgcibelo Motha  Boitumelo PhalatsePhakamani Dadlanais published by Government Communications (GCIS)Vuk’uzenzeleAll rights reserved.  Reproduction of the newspaper in whole or in part without  written  permission is strictly prohibited.
Distributed by: Printed by:GENERALher plush job at a bank and invest her own money into restoring part of the dilapidated shoe factory to house her new business. She hoped her own business would be a beacon of hope for the area’s downtrodden residents.
“I took the decision to resign and come back home so that I could help revive the economy of my area,” Mntungwa told Vuk’uzenzele.
The factory has so far managed to create jobs for 137 people, the majority of whom are women.
“I decided to manufacture uniforms for school children because the only other factory that manufactures school uniforms in KwaZulu-Natal is based some distance away, in Durban,” she explained.
Mntungwa said it is important for her to empower women, most especially in more neglected rural areas where there is a lack of access to information and resources.
“Rural life is still very much dominated by a patriarchal system where women find themselves working harder to prove themselves,” she said. She said it is also common for them to drop out of school to run their child-headed family.
“The situation compelled me to intervene and develop these ‘young wives’ through skills transfer,” said Mntungwa.She empowers them through job creation and skills capacitation.
“I believe skills transfer is a sustainable gift – it can empower people to become income generators and survive during difficult situations,” she added.
The factory also employs 50 young people who produce sanitary pads to help solve the problem of young girls in rural areas missing school when they are menstruating.  Mntungwa’s business is funded through the women economic empowerment programme run by the KwaZulu-Natal Department of Economic Development, Tourism and Environmen-tal Affairs (EDTEA). Over  R4 million has been committed.
Funding already received has helped Mntungwa rehabilitate a large section of the old factory and this in turn has enabled her to expand her operation and create more jobs.
EDTEA MEC Sihle Zikalala has praised Mntungwa for her vision and thanked her for the sterling job she has done in trying to eradicate poverty in the area.
“We are also proud that she employs women. We will continue to support initiatives like these as they become the engine of development," the MEC said.
From page 1Unemployed youth  given a helping handLebogang Sothane says being part of the Youth Employ ment Service (YES) initia tive will take him far in his career.
Sothoane is among the  3 315 young people, who were recently inducted into Ned bank’s workforce through the YES initiative.
This brought an end to the 27-year-old’s four-year jour ney to find employment.
Completing her matric in 2011, Sothoane registered for a degree but was forced to drop out due to financial constraints.
“In 2014, I stayed at home, dropped out and in 2015, I did my Logistics degree through the National Student Finan cial Aid Scheme,” she said.
Sothoane is among the in ductees who will now work for Nedbank under the YES initiative that was launched by President Cyril Ramapho -sa in 2018. Sothoane, who shared the stage with the first citizen during a panel discus sion together with two other YES inductees, did not hold back in telling the President the challenges they faced in getting a foot in the door of the workplace.
Among the challenges she highlighted were being de nied access to entry level posts due to a lack of experience, as well as financial exclusion at tertiary institutions due to a lack of funds, and cases where one cannot graduate because their student fees are in arrears.
Nedbank Group Chief Ex -ecutive Officer Mike Brown said the bank is taking on the youth  as a way to make a dent in South Africa’s high unemployment figures.
“We want to go beyond business as usual and create meaningful job opportunities for our youth,“ said Brown at the ceremony held at the bank’s Sandton premises.
The President listened in tently to the concerns raised by the youth during the panel discussion.
“I am troubled by this,” said the President, referring to the country’s unemploy ment figures and challenges faced by youth in obtaining employment.
In many ways, said the President, Nedbank and other companies which have taken on youth employees have gone beyond the call of duty.
“There are so many unem ployed young people. I have interfaced with it at a close range,” President Ramapho sa said, adding that the pre requisite for experience for young employees has turned out to become a bar rier.
To date, the YES initiative has managed to secure  17 000 work opportunities for unemployed youth. 
“I took the decision to resign and come back home so that I could help revive the economy of my area.’’ President Cyril Ramaphosa with some of the young people who are working for Nedbank through the YES initiative.  2