Vuk’uzenzeleFROM THE UNION BUILDINGSTogether we move South Africa forward#SendMe
ThumaMinaTogether we move South Africa forward#SendMe
ThumaMina“The fact that the unemployment rate among young South Africans is more than 50 percent is a national crisis that demands urgent, innovative and coordinated solutions.” Not enough jobs are being created in South Africa and our economy is not growing.
These challenges rose above all others in President Cyr il Ramaphosa’s State of the Nation Address (SONA).
The President said that while remarkable progress in build ing a new nation has been made over the past 25 years, South Africa is confronted by severe challenges.
 “Our economy is not grow ing. Not enough jobs are being created. This is the concern that rises above all others. It affects everyone.
 “Through the elections held in May, you provided all of us with a clear mandate for growth and renewal. We have heard you,” the President said.
Creating employmentThe President explained that the growth of the economy will have little value unless it creates employment on a greater scale.
 “The fact that the unem ployment rate among young South Africans is more than 50 percent is a national crisis that demands urgent, innovative and coordinated solutions.
“The brutal reality is that when it comes to youth unem ployment, we have to run just to remain in the same place.” The President confirmed that it’s essential to implement a comprehensive plan – driven and coordinated by the Presi dency – without delay, to create no less than two million new jobs for young people within the next decade.
 “This plan will work across government departments and all three tiers of government, in partnership with the pri vate sector,” the President confirmed.
 Growth and renewalThe sixth administration has put five goals and seven priorities in place to tackle South Africa’s challenges and meet the targets set out in the National Development Plan (NDP) by 2030.
“With 10 years to go before we reach 2030, we have not made nearly enough progress in meeting the NDP targets.
Unless we take extraordinary measures, we will not realise Vision 2030. This means that we need to prioritise.
“It is time to make choices. Some of these choices may be difficult and some may not please everyone. In an econ omy that is not growing, at a time when public finances are limited, we will not be able to do everything at one time,” the President said.
The sixth administration will thus focus on economic trans formation and job creation; education, skills and health; consolidating the social wage through reliable and quality ba sic services; spatial integration, human settlements and local government; social cohesion and safe communities; a capa ble, ethical and developmental state; and a better Africa and world.
 “All our programmes and policies across all departments and agencies will be directed in pursuit of these overarching tasks.”Goals for the future “To ensure that our efforts are directed, I am suggesting that, within the priorities of this administration, we agree on five fundamental goals for the next decade,” the President said.
 These goals are to ensure that no person in South Africa is hungry; the economy grows at a much faster rate than the population; two million more young people will be employed; schools have bet ter educational outcomes and every 10-year old can read for meaning; and violent crime is halved.
“Let us make these commit ments now – to ourselves and to each other – knowing that they will stretch our resources and capabilities, but under standing that if we achieve these five goals, we will have fundamentally transformed our society,” said President Ramaphosa.
 To meet these goals, the Pres ident stressed that the focus should be on strengthening the social wage and reducing the cost of living; improving affordability, safety and inte gration of commuter transport for low-income households; accelerating the provision of well-located housing and land to poor South Africans; and attending to the capacity of hospitals and clinics.
“To address the problems of the working poor, the nation al minimum wage has been in place for six months and the early indications are that many companies are comply ing.
 “The National Minimum Wage Commission is expected to conclude research on the impact of the minimum wage on employment, poverty, in equality and wage differen tials by the end of September 2019,” the President said.
Pay for electricityAnother grave concern highlighted by the President is Eskom’s financial position.
With the current com mitted funding from government, Eskom only has sufficient cash to meet its obligations until the end of October 2019. Government will thus urgently table a Special Appropriation Bill to allocate a sig nificant portion of the R230 billion to support  Eskom’s needs over the next 10 years.
“This we must do because Eskom is too vital to our economy to be allowed to fail. We must assert the princi ple that those who use electricity must pay for it.
“Failure to pay en dangers our entire electricity supply, our economy and our efforts to create jobs.
The days of boycott ing payment are over.
This is now the time to build, it is the time for all of us to make our own contribution,” the President stressed. 3July Edition 1SONA: Building  the SA we want