
Vuk’uzenzeleTel: 012 473 0089 Email: vukuzenzele@gcis.gov.zaAddress: Private Bag X745,  Pretoria, 0001Head of Editorial and Production  Tasneem Carrim  |  tasneem@gcis.gov.zaEditor-in-ChiefGill Price | gill@gcis.gov.zaManaging EditorOngezwa Mogotsi ongezwa@gcis.gov.zaNews Editor Noluthando Motswai Writers  More Matshediso, Jauhara KhanSilusapho NyandaSenior Designer | Tendai Gonese Junior Designer  | Tsholofelo Sepeng Language Practitioners  Nomgcibelo Motha  Boitumelo PhalatsePhakamani Dadlanais published by Government Communications (GCIS)Vuk’uzenzeleAll rights reserved.  Reproduction of the newspaper in whole or in part without  written  permission is strictly prohibited.
Distributed by: Printed by:STATE OF THE NATION ADDRESS 2
July Edition 1President Cyril  Ramaphosa out lined his vision for government for the next five years, emphasising that a strong social com pact was needed.
He said there was a need to forge durable partnerships between government, busi ness, labour, communities and civil society.
As President Ramaphosa spoke about the state of the nation, a number of interest ing numbers  came to light.
National Development Plan (NDP)1 100 – The number of indi cators that the Medium-Term Strategic Framework had for the last five years, which measured progress in the implementation of the NDP .
5 – The number of years in which the Medium-Term Strategic Framework had more than 1 100 indicators, which measured progress in the implementation of the NDP .
Government priorities and goals7 – The number of priorities that the new administration will focus on.
5 – The number of funda -mental goals for the next decade.
10 – The number of years in which governmen t will make progress in tackling poverty, inequality and unemploy ment.
Employment and economic opportunities50 percent – The unem ployment rate among young South Africans.
2 million  – New jobs to be created for young people within the next decade.
50 000  – The number of young people that the Na tional Youth Service will take a year.
6 – The number of months which the national minimum wage has been in place.
155 000  – Jobs to be created in the next five years through the Public-Private Growth Initiative.
2 million  -Young people who will be employed in the next decade.
Quality education 10 – The age in which a child will be able to read for mean ing in the next decade.
3, 6 and  9 – The targeted school grades where there should be an improvement in the capabilities of teachers and ensuring a more consist -ent measurement of progress.
500 000 – The number of children of school-going age with disabilities who are not in school.
Human settlements5 – The number of years that government will accelerate the provision of well-located housing and land to poor South Africans.
70 percent  -The number of South Africans that are going to be living in the urban areas by 2030 .
Access to healthcare2 million  – The figure that government aims to increase the number of people on antiretroviral treatment by December 2020.
Growing the economy 10 – The number of years in which government expects South Africa’s economy to be growing at a rate far greater than country’s population.
R230 billion  – The fiscal support that Eskom will require over the next 10 years.
R300 billion  – The amount of investments announced at the inaugural Investment Conference in 2018.
R250 billion  – The value of projects that has entered the implementation phase.
R840 billion  – The amount that the private sector has committed to invest in pro jects through the Public-Private Growth Initiative.
43 – Number of projects that the private sector has com mitted to invest in through the Public-Private Growth Initiative.
19 – Number of sectors that the private sector has com mitted to invest in through the Public-Private Growth Initiative.
R100 billion  – The amount that government has allocated for the Infrastructure Fund.
1 day  – The period it should take for companies to be registered.
R3.9 billion  – The amount allocated to the Land Bank to support black commercial farmers.
Tourism21 million  – The number of international tourist arrivals projected by 2030.
Safety and security5 000  – Number of students registered for basic training in South Africa’s police training colleges.
7 000  – The envisaged number of students to be registered for basic training in South Africa’s police training colleges per cycle over the next two intakes.
R14.7 billion  – The value of estimated civil claims arising from the Special Investigative Unit investigations.
Strengthening local government44 –The number of districts that government will focus on to speed up service delivery, ensuring that municipalities are properly supported and adequately resourced.
8 – Number of metros that government will focus on to speed up service delivery, ensuring that mu nicipalities are properly supported and adequately resourced.
Democracy 25 –The number of years since South Africa’s democracy.
STATE OF THE NATION ADDRESSSONA in numbersR