Vuk’uzenzeleFROM THE UNION BUILDINGSTogether we move South Africa forward#SendMe
ThumaMinaTogether we move South Africa forward#SendMe
ThumaMinaBuilding a better  future for our youth  Youth Month is cele brated every year  in June to pay homage to the brave spirit of South African youth who took to the streets on 16 June 1976 to fight against the use of Af rikaans as a medium of in struction in our schools. I be lieve that the same fighting spirit still lives in the new generation of young people, who are now fighting against the scourge of poverty, un employment and inequality.  These young people who have insatiable aspirations for a better life, demonstrated their steadfastness and forbearance when they came together to call for free tertiary education.
The achievement of a stable and successful South Africa with an inclusive economy is uppermost on the agenda of government to ensure a better life for all. We have and will continue redoubling our ef forts to develop and empower youth to be able to contribute to growing our country.
Despite making up the ma jority of South Africa’s popu lation, youth continue to bear the brunt of unemployment, poverty and inequality. They remain the hardest hit by dis ease, violent crime, drug abuse and underdevelopment.
As a caring government, we are working hard to ensure that young people acquire skills and experience, and also receive the necessary support to enter the world of entrepre neurship as job creators rather than jobseekers.
Last year, I launched the Youth Employment Service (YES) programme, which aims to prepare young people for employment and provide them with the technical skills needed to underpin the industrialisa tion of the economy.
The YES programme is a joint effort by government, labour and business to offer paidwork experiences to one mil lion South African youth over the next three years. According to research, out of 15.5 million people aged between 18 and 34 in South Africa, 5.8 million are unemployed.
With a number of large companies already involved, the YES initiative has so far managed to secure 17 000 work opportunities for unemployed youth.  For young people who have entrepreneurial aspirations, government established the National Youth Development Agency, which offers skills development training, devel opment finance, mentorship, support and market linkages.
More than 2 500 start-up companies have since been provided with funding, creat ing more than 10 000 jobs in the economy.
If we are to make the most of the partnership between gov ernment and the private sector, we need to ensure that young South Africans are properly equipped to participate in all sectors of the economy. That is why we are investing in the education of our youth.
We are resolute to ensure that all children, regardless of their circumstances, are not denied access to quality education.
This is being complemented by our endeavour to improve the quality of teaching and learn ing in our schools and tertiary institutions.
Earlier this year, the Depart ment of Higher Education and Training announced the allo cation of R967 million for the payment of fees for students owing ‘historical debt’.
This money will assist stu dents who owed fees from the previous year by ensuring that the debt does not prevent them from accessing tertiary education.  With all the investments made by government for their empowerment, youth must also play their part in growing South Africa. They must be preoccupied with activities that contribute to making the country a better and safer place for all to live in. Some of our young people are engaged in awe-inspiring projects, small businesses and farming in their communities. They have taken a proactive decision to play a meaningful role in taking the country forward and growing the economy. We must encour age more young people to look at ways of using their talents and skills to start their own businesses and create jobs.  Such a noble responsibility involves abstaining from alco hol and drug abuse, and also not participating in crime and corruption.
And more importantly, young people must keep themselves safe from HIV and other sex ually transmitted illnesses by using a condom, abstaining from early sexual activity and getting tested regularly.
The future of South Africa lies in the hands of the youth who are committed  to building a society that is different from the one that the youth of 1976 come from. Let us work together to secure a better future for our youth.  3June Edition 2