Vuk’uzenzeleTel: 012 473 0089 Email: vukuzenzele@gcis.gov.zaAddress: Private Bag X745,  Pretoria, 0001Head of Editorial and Production  Tasneem Carrim  |  tasneem@gcis.gov.zaEditor-in-ChiefElias Tibane | elias@gcis.gov.zaManaging EditorOngezwa Mogotsi ongezwa@gcis.gov.zaNews Editor Noluthando Motswai Writers  More Matshediso, Jauhara KhanSilusapho NyandaSenior DesignerTendai Gonese Language Practitioners  Nomgcibelo Motha  Boitumelo PhalatsePhakamani Dadlanais published by Government Communications (GCIS)Vuk’uzenzeleAll rights reserved.  Reproduction of the newspaper in whole or in part without  written  permission is strictly prohibited.
Distributed by: Printed by:GENERALTeen joins the  fight against crimeSilusapho NyandaA Pretoria school girl’s belief that fighting crime is the responsibility of young and old will moti vate her as she helps lead one of the SAPS’s youth crime prevention flagship programmes.
In February, Felistas Ham ba (15) and the country’s other Junior Provincial Commissioners took part in a debate and public speaking competition that delved into the social ills facing schools. Hamba’s impressive performance saw her named the South African Junior National Police Commissioner.
Hamba’s team includes four deputy national com missioners, who come from the North West, Eastern Cape, Limpopo and Kwa -Zulu-Natal.
It will be their mission to ensure that young people participate in making their schools and communities safer. “Crime affects us all. If you see a crime happening, please report it,” she called on her peers. “Making our schools safer starts with you.”They will focus on physical bullying, crime prevention, gangsterism and cyberbul lying.
Hamba decided to take part in the programme after realising that a lot of her peers didn’t know how to handle crimes that affect them. “As a young person, I am there to set a platform for them so that they can be change-makers for tomor -row,” she said.
The grade 10 pupil of DC Marivate Senior Secondary School in Soshanguve said innovative thinking by young people is needed to reduce crime in communi ties and at schools.
“Without young people leading this country, it will not go anywhere,” Hamba warned her peers.
Hamba’s dad is a police officer and it is her dream to follow in his footsteps.
The principal of Hamba’s school, John Mangezi, said her impact is positively influencing others in the school. “It’s very important for the school to have her in our midst because other learners want to be like her,” Mangezi said.
Junior Police Commissioner Felistas Hamba wants to fight crime in schools across the country.
“I was researching careers in maths and scien ce and saw a SAAF advert, outlining the requirements to be a pilot or navigator. I realised that I could potentially have a career in aviation and was so excited that I couldn’t sleep,” said Major Mfeka, who is now 29 years old. Straight after graduat ing from high school, she joined the air force in 2008 as an airman. She officially achieved her SAAF wings in 2011, and progressed quickly through the ranks to become a qualified pilot and then captain. Today, she holds the esteemed rank of major and flies the British-made Hawk Mk120 from the Airforce Base Makhado in Limpopo.
Flying above gender and race barriersMajor Mfeka is humble about the incredible achievement of being the first female black African fighter jet pilot.
“I know I am representing a lot of people, but I have achieved this because this is the direction I wanted to go.
At the SAAF, I have been sur rounded by people who are professionals, people who are ambitious and want to be the best, so I wanted to embody that and be an expert in my career,” she said.
Major Mfeka added that she hasn’t felt intimidated by the male-dominated nature of the field.
“I just had to be more asser tive and grow a thicker skin emotionally,” she said, adding that she sometimes outper -formed the men in training or on the academic front.
Soaring higher Major Mfeka has flown jets at some of South Africa’s most prestig ious events. A few years after getting her wings, she was tasked with flying at the funeral of former President Nelson Mandela.
She also fondly remembers being part of a flying forma tion for Freedom Day in Port Elizabeth, which was led by one of her idols.
“The lead plane was flown by Colonel Musa Mbhokota, who was the SAAF’s first black fighter jet pilot. He is somebody I look up to very much and I draw such inspi ration from him, so it was an honour flying in formation with him.”Mfeka’s biggest dream is to become the commander of a Gripen jet, the SAAF’s premier fighter jet.
“When I see myself flying that jet, I get extremely excit ed. I would be so honoured if I could reach that milestone – it would be a dream come true.”Message for Youth MonthMajor Mfeka said that the youth should never let their circumstances stand in the way of becoming a success.
“Your dreams and passions are an indication of what you can achieve and what you can become. Your potential is not determ ined by your background. Some people from very impoverished are as have achieved really great things; they did not let their circumstances dictate to them what their life was going to be like.” 