Vuk’uzenzeleTel: 012 473 0089 Email: vukuzenzele@gcis.gov.zaAddress: Private Bag X745,  Pretoria, 0001Head of Editorial and Production  Tasneem Carrim  |  tasneem@gcis.gov.zaEditor-in-ChiefZanele Mngadi | zanelemngadi@gcis.gov.zaManaging EditorOngezwa Mogotsi ongezwa@gcis.gov.zaNews Editor Noluthando Motswai Writers  More Matshediso, Jauhara KhanSilusapho NyandaSenior Designer | Tendai Gonese Junior Designer  | Tsholofelo Sepeng Language Practitioners  Nomgcibelo Motha  Boitumelo PhalatsePhakamani Dadlanais published by Government Communications (GCIS)Vuk’uzenzeleAll rights reserved.  Reproduction of the newspaper in whole or in part without  written  permission is strictly prohibited.
Distributed by: Printed by:GENERALTourism Safety Monitors to patrol Table Mountainbroader National Environ mental Monitors Programme (NEMP) which responds to poaching, biodiversity degradation in protected areas and environmental education in communities surrounding protected areas.
The nation-wide Programme has appointed 2 000 people as part of the Expanded Public Works Programme (EPWP).
In this Programme which takes form of Public-Private Partnership, the DEEF is responsible for payment of monthly salaries of the Black Mambas and Transfrontier Africa pays for all operation al costs including training, transport, accommodation and personal protective equipment and tools.
Within a year, the Black Mambas expanded into other regions and now protect all boundaries of the 52 000-hec tare Balule Nature Reserve, which is part of the Greater Kruger National Park.Vuk’uzenzele spoke to Leit ah Mkhabela (26), the unit supervisor, who oversees the 14-member team – all women except for one male.
“I joined the unit in 2014 and underwent extensive training to learn how to protect myself and others in the bush against wild animals, which I also protect from poachers. It felt like we were being trained to become soldiers because we also learned how to track poachers and protect our selves from them,” she said.
According to Mkhabela, the unit was founded in response to the increase in rhino poach ing, as well as to create job opportunities for women in communities around the Kruger National Park.
“Basically, we are the eyes and ears in the park. We report any suspicious move ments,” she said.  Each morning, the group patrols the fences to ensure they have not been tampered with, while keeping an eye out for anything else that might raise red flags.
“We walk between 15 and 21 kilometres a day,” she said.
“This is a good opportunity for women in the rural com munities around the park be cause most are unemployed,” she explained.
Mkhabela, who hails from Mpumalanga’s Hluvukani village, completed her matric in 2011 but could not further her studies because of a lack of funds. Joining the Black Mambas gave her the chance to gain skills and make a meaningful contribution to society.
The job is not without danger, though. A year after joining the Black Mambas, she had a traumatic experi ence when poachers tried to attack her and her colleagues.
“It was in 2015 and I was only 22 years old when poachers came for us in the park because we were inter fering with their plans.
Mkhabela said the unit works closely with law en forcement agencies such as the SAPS.
The team has won several awards internationally, but Mkhabela said of greater significance to them is the difference they are making in their communities.
“The main goal is to teach our communities about the importance of wildlife pres -ervation and the benefits such as tourism and job creation that comes with it. These are long-term benefits, unlike the short-term gains you get from killing animals for money,” she said.
About the Black Mambas and Transfrontier AfricaAccording to the Black Mamba Anti-Poaching Unit they are the first line of de fence, providing boots on the ground. They are responsible for the early detection of poaching insurgents.
Transfrontier Africa NPC stated on their website that the the war on poaching will not be won with guns and bullets, but through social upliftment and the educa tion of local communities surrounding the reserves.
The organisation believes in strengthening partner ships with the adjacent tribal communities and seeking new technologies and part nerships to solve the illegal wildlife trade.
The Black Mambas’ an ti-poaching strategy includes visual policing through daily boundary patrols which are conducted on foot during first light and by vehicle at last light.
Transfrontier Africa NPC added that observation and listening posts are stationed in critical areas such as known entry and exit points or popular rhino waterholes for signs of poisoning.
Disruptive patrols are per formed within areas of high rhino density to stop any attempts to poach rhino in the area, while roadblocks are used to search both known and unknown vehicles for any illegal or suspicious items.
Building sites and staff com pounds within the reserve are searched regularly to gather intelligence and to ensure that all the reserve rules are being adhered to.
The Black Mamba An ti-poaching Unit only recruit employees when there are available vacancies. It targets rural communities around the park by approaching the Chiefs in those communities to get blessings and  then it works closely with the Tribal Council to design a recruitment drive until suitable candidates are selected for training. 
The Department of Environment, Forestry and Fisheries calls on members of the public to report any suspicious activities around wildlife to its Environmental Crime Hotline on  0800 205 005 or the SAPS number 10111Image: Lee-Ann OlwageTourism Minister Mmam oloko Kubayi-Ngubane says the launch of the Tour ism Safety Monitors will help improve safety around Table Mountain and bolster tourist arrivals.
Kubayi-Ngubane said this when she introduced 69 new safety monitor recruits at the launch of the National Tourism Safety Awareness Campaign at Table Mountain in Cape Town recently.
“I am excited because I’m able to say to our tourists we are doing something about their concerns and today we are here deploying our safety monitors.
“We are rolling out our safety campaign to ensure that when tourists come here, they enjoy this beautiful country and go back to their countries and tell many other people to visit South Africa,” she said.
The launch follows concerns over the number of incidents, where tourists fell victim to violent attacks on Table Mountain.
In a recent incident, an Ukranian tourist was attacked and murdered for his belongings while hiking on Chapman’s Peak.
This sparked outrage over the lack of safety patrols on Table Mountain, which is world renowned as one of the Seven Natural Wonders of the World.
In addition to the 69 recruits, about 19 more are still in training and will be deployed in the near future. They will monitor activities on the mountain and report promptly to the police if there is anything suspicious.
The initiative is in partnership with South African  National Parks, the Department of Environment, Fisheries and Forestry, SA Police Service and the business sector. It also boost job creation efforts as the safety monitors were previously unemployed.SAnews.gov.za 