Vuk’uzenzeleGENERALTel: 012 473 0089 Email: vukuzenzele@gcis.gov.zaAddress: Private Bag X745,  Pretoria, 0001Head of Editorial and Production  Tasneem Carrim  |  tasneem@gcis.gov.zaEditor-in-ChiefZanele Mngadi | zanelemngadi@gcis.gov.zaManaging EditorOngezwa Mogotsi ongezwa@gcis.gov.zaNews Editor Noluthando Motswai Writers  More Matshediso, Jauhara KhanSilusapho NyandaSenior Designer | Tendai Gonese Junior Designer  | Tsholofelo Sepeng Language Practitioners  Nomgcibelo Motha  Boitumelo PhalatsePhakamani Dadlanais published by Government Communications (GCIS)Vuk’uzenzeleAll rights reserved.  Reproduction of the newspaper in whole or in part without  written  permission is strictly prohibited.
Distributed by:
From page 1 Khumbu Shelem be’s had an in teresting journey from punching the till at a Durban Caltex station to owning an operation that sells almost 10,000 litres of fuel a day.
Having started out as a cashier at the Mobeni service station in Durban in 2007, Shelembe, now 36-yearsold, got her first promotion after only six months in book-keeping and supply chain.
She completed Caltex Re tailer Courses in 2011 and 2016 and the previous owner of the Mobeni service station then gave her the opportuni ty to buy a 30 percent share in the business in February 2017.
Later that year, the oppor tunity arose for her to own the station outright.
After an interview with Astron Energy, which owns the Caltex license, special funding was made avail able to Shelembe and she took complete control of the business.
 Astron Energy is now funding the building of Fresh Stop at her site.
“It’s like living a dream,” Shelembe said. “When I think of the way I grew up, I never thought that one day I would be blessed like this.” Hailing from Mtwalume on the S outh Coast of Kwa Zulu-Natal, she funded her studies through bursaries earned from her father’s place of work. She received a National Diploma in Mar keting Management from the Mangosuthu University of Technology in 2004.
 Reflecting on her jour ney, Shelembe tells of her appreciation for those who helped her along the way.
“The people I worked with are very good people. They helped me step by step and now I employ other people and I’m happy because I can employ those who are struggling,” she said.
 With 13 people working at her service station, Shelem be is focused on growth, support and incentivising excellent customer service.
“We motivate each other and share ideas. I also offer incentives for top per forming customer service attendants, based on their sales and customer service.”Aside from her incentive scheme, Shelembe makes sure her team is cared for, ensuring they practice good work-life-balance and spend enough time with their families.
 Her caring approach to her staff, along with her focus on customer service means that Shelembe service station is always pumping.
“On busy days we are doing nearly 10 000 litres of diesel and 5 000 litres of petrol per day. We have a huge site and we cater for trucks and small cars alike.” Astron Energy General Manager Retail Price Njok weni believes Shelembe is a role model for successful transformation and uplift ment in the petrol retail industry.
“We have funding mech anisms and support pro grammes in place for exact ly this type of entrepreneur.
She has ta ken every oppor tunity to advance herself and her business.” Shelembe said she is com mitted to even more growth and development.
“I have to be strong and make Africa proud of me,” she said.  vdress, President Ramaphosa said special economic zones, such as the Dube Trade Port, are important instruments and mediums of attracting foreign investment as well as domestic investment. The SEZs, he said, are also important in building targeted industrial capabilities and establishing new industrial hubs.
“Studies reveal that sea port cities grow faster than inland port cities due to their strategic locations. Durban is especially well positioned but we actually add to that positioning by having that special SEZ. This in itself is a very good foundation to catapult our country to higher levels of growth,” he said.
He praised Thakkar for being a patriotic African.“He is clear, he’s articulate, he’s a visionary and knows exactly what he wants to achieve,” he said.
SA ready and open for investmentThakkar thanked President Ramaphosa and the South African government for pushing the company deliver on its undertaking.
“We have come to South Africa much, much sooner than we have initially planned. We did this because of your vision of making South Africa shine again as a true investment destination and creating real jobs for our youth. It is truly working and we are proof of that,” he said.
As an African investor with investment in 25 African countries, he said venturing into South Africa has been a phenomenal experience.
“It really does show that South Africa is ready and open for investment and for business. More boldness and vision encouraged us to do this and will hopefully contribute to your fourth industrial revolution ambition as well.
Confidence in SAKwaZulu-Natal Premier Sihle Zikalala thanked Mara Phone for showing confidence in KwaZulu-Natal and South Africa.
“The people of [KZN] are pro foundly grateful and honoured to make history and open the first South African cellphone production plant,” he said.
Zikalala praised President Ramaphosa for what he de scribed as tireless efforts and strides in promoting investment in South Africa.
“We are all aware of the efforts of the President to ensure that we attract investment and address the plight of South Africans who are unemployed and go to bed on empty stomachs.
We hope this launch will go far in strengthening your resolve to continue championing our government’s cause of reducing unemployment, inequality and poverty,” he said.
Changing the narrativeTrade and Industry Minister Ebrahim Patel said it is good to see  Africa changing the narrative of being a consumer of goods it does not produce.
“We are changing that sto ryline with cars, with fibre optic cables, with television monitors, with food and now with smartphones … It is good to see this,” he said.
He said today’s launch was critical in cementing KZN as a centre of advanced manufac turing.
“The KZN manufacturing sector employs 350 000 people and it’s the sixth largest manu facturing sector in the African economy. The implementation of the SEZ programme at the Dube Trade Port supported this growth in manufacturing.
“If you walk around you will see fibre optic cables being made, television monitors being assembled … you see examples of manufacturi ng in South Africa. From this example and what we’ve done here and other examples in the country. We are moving forward,” said Patel. –  SAnews.gov.za v2
November 2019 Edition 1From petrol station cashier to owner Khumbu Shelembe has made major inroads in the petrol retail industry and is now a budding entrepreneur.