Empowering women through agriculture

Owen Mngadi 

Dr Ethel Zulu is a remarkable small farmer on the rise.She uses her in-depth understanding of nutrition and years of experience to produce organic chickens and vegetables on her farm with the aim of empowering other women to become commercial farmers. Dr Zulu (48), who holds a doctorate in nutrition, owns a 23-hectare farm in Cul-linan outside Pretoria, where she produces and agro-pro-cesses organic veggies and chickens that she supplies to several supermarkets. Her farm also hosts 20 students who are pursuing agricultural studies for trai-ning. Dr Zulu left her job at the North West Department of Agriculture to start her training agency, Hope Nutri-tion Business Consultants. This was after she relocated to Gauteng but could not find a job as a nutritionist. She is passionate about agri-culture and her vision is to get as many women as pos-sible into farming, a field she believes has the potential to empower and create jobs.“I served for eight years, working with agricultural extension officers, and we helped many farmers with food safety, hygiene and nutrition. Agriculture has been my passion since I was young and I never imagined myself doing anything else.”Through her training agency, Dr Zulu explained that she worked across six provinces, helping women and young people to run their farming operations.  Commercial poultry farmingIn 2017, Dr Zulu realised that her training was meaningless without results, so she bought a farm to put her knowledge into action.Today, she has become a commercial poultry farmer with more than 7 500 broi-lers. Her initial plan was to produce only organic vegetables. “I needed chickens for manure. I would go to people’s houses to collect it to keep my veggies organic.
South Africa's first female paratrooper Dr Ethel Zulu is leading from the front on her farm where she grows organic vegetables and free-range chickens she supplies to the established supermarkets.
That is how the idea of the broilers came about. Within two years, we produced 5 000 broilers and started to supply local super-markets.”She added that her chicken are free-range and organic, with zero hor-mones. She uses chicken manure to grow vegetables such as spinach, broccoli, cabbage and peppers. In addition to supermarkets, Dr Zulu supplies her produce to hawkers. Her operation is so succes-sful that she employs 12 women permanently. According to Dr Zulu, poultry is the most critical sector in the country, as most families consume chicken more than any other kind of meat.Dr Zulu has hopes of training more than 1 000 women in farming across the country each year. She is also set on being one of South Africa’s trusted producers of free-range chickens and organic vegetables. She advises aspiring female farmers to start small and not wait for government support. “When government sup-port finds you, it will be a boost. If you need to produce 3 000 broilers, nothing stops you from starting with 20. Approach local supermarkets to get their specifications on the quality they want and work in groups so that you can meet their quality and quantity demands,” she adds.
Empowering women through agricultureDr Zulu believes agri culture can play a role in empowering women economically and creating more jobs for women. “If you empower a woman, you empower the nation. We are able to share our knowledge and get more people involved.”She adds that women do not have to limit themselves to primary  agriculture but need to explore other aspects of the industry such as agro-processing, packaging and reselling. “Financial independence is the only thing that can help us end the scourge of gender-based violence and that can be achieved through farming, among other things,” said Dr Zulu.