Living positively with HIV

More Matshediso 

Since he was  just one month old, 10-yearold Themba Buthele zi* has been on HIV treatment.
His mother Slindelo Buthelezi*, who lives in Johannesburg, passed the virus to her infant through her breastmilk.
She shared with Vuk’uzenzele the details of how she strives to keep both herself and her son healthy by ensuring they routinely take their antiretroviral treatment (ART) to supress their viral loads.
“He was  about one month old when he tested  positive.  I could not understand why because his siblings did not get the infection. The nurses at the clinic then explained to me that unfortunately my son got it from breast feeding. I was devastated but I had to accept it as time went by,” she said.
She has made her son’s health a priority. Because she has been living with the disease for over 25 years, Slindelo knows that to keep her child alive and strong, she must ensure that he never misses a dose of his medicine.
When Themba was about seven, Slindelo explained to him why he had to take medication every night.
“I told him the truth. I also told him not to be scared and let him know that I also live with HIV .
Because I am a mother who talks openly to her children, it was easy for him to accept it and we talk about it whenever it is necessary because I want him to be free,” she explained.
“We go to the clinic to gether and he is aware of his health status. He un derstands very well why he has to take medication.
Sometimes he even re minds me just before the alarm rings to remind us to take it,” she said.
Slindelo said her son’s class teacher knows about his status and understands that he will sometimes be absent from school to allow him to go for check-ups and to col lect medication.
“I think it is in my child’s best interests that the teacher knows,” she explained.
She advised parents and guardians who have children who live with the disease to take their chil dren to clinics or doctors whenever they are not well.
 Her biggest challenge is that she is unem -ployed and survives on social grants and the profit made from selling ice-cream. With regular meals essential to their wellbeing, much of their money goes on buying nutritious food.
“So far I can say my child is okay. He has never been troubled or felt that he was different from other children just because he lives with the dise ase. He is very bright and does well at school,” she said.
*Not their real names.from page 12
December 2018 EditionWhilst South Af rica has the  largest HIV ep idemic in the world, with about 19 percent of the global number of people living with HIV , 15 per cent of new infections and 11 percent of Aids-related deaths, it also has the larg est treatment programme in the world, accounting for 20 percent of people on antiretroviral therapy globally.
The country also has one of the largest domestically funded programmes, with about 80 percent of the Aids response funded by the gov ernment. Below is a timeline of significant developments in South Africa’s fight against HIV/Aids over the years.
1983: First case of Aids di agnosed in South Africa and the first aids-related death.
1985: First advisory group for Aids was established by government.
1990: First national antena tal survey revealed that 0.8 percent of pregnant women were infected with HIV .
1993: HIV prevalence in pregnant women rose to 4.3 percent. The number of HIV infections recorded rose by 60 percent within two years.
The numbers were predicted to double.
1996: Three percent of the population was infected.
1997: The health depart ment endorsed the contro versial drug Virodene.
2000: The Department of Health rolled out the first five-year National Strategic Plan (NSP) to fight sexually transmitted diseases (STIs), Tuberculosis (TB) and HIV/Aids. To supervise the pro cess, the South African Na tional Aids Council (SANAC) was established.
2001: Government fought with pharmaceutical compa nies to allow for less expen -sive and locally-produced anti-retroviral drugs.
2002: Transmission preven tion drugs became available to pregnant women by order of the High Court.
2003: Plans to make an ti-retroviral treatment avail able readily and publicly was approved.
2004: Government intro duced free anti-retroviral (ARV) therapy. Since then, the number of South Africans receiving ARV treatment has risen rapidly and new in fections among adolescents have steadily decreased.
2007: SANAC finalised the second five-year NSP .
2008:  Thabo Mbeki re signed as South African President and his successor, Kgalema Motlanthe, appoint ed Barbara Hogan as Minister of Health. She immediately committed government to a concerted and decisive re sponse to the epidemic.
2012: SANAC’s third NSP (2012 to 2016) massively scaled up South Africa’s anti-retroviral treatment programme and reduced the number of mother-to-child transmission rate to 1.5 per cent. From 2012 to 2017, HIV incidence decreased by 44 percent.
2013: Minister of Health, Dr Aaron Motsoaledi, introduc es the fixed-dose combination (FDC) antiretroviral drugs (ARVs) also known as the single dose. The single pill is taken once a day instead of three to five pills a day.
2016: There were 7.1 mil lion people living with HIV , of which 56 percent were on antiretroviral therapy.
2016 to 2017: New infec tions amongst adolescent girls and young women decreased from 2 000 per week in 2016 to 1 300 per week in 2017, and 67 percent of men between 15 and 24 were reported to be medically circumcised.
2017–2022: The fourth NSP aims to accelerate pro gress towards meeting fasttrack targets by reducing new HIV infections; improving treatment, care and support; reaching key and vulnerable populations; and addressing the social and structural driv ers of HIV , TB and STIs.