New health centre for Port Nolloth

Jauhara Khan

The seaside town of Port Nolloth in the Northern Cape will soon benefit from a full-service community health centre project which promises to enhance access to quality healthcare. The project is being implemented by the Independent Development Trust (IDT) on behalf of the Northern Cape provincial Department of Health at a cost of about R150 million and is expected to open soon. Once completed, the building will comprise all primary health facilities including a trauma unit, radiology, dispensary, psychiatric ward, maternity wards and paediatric wards. Consultation rooms will be used for reproductive health services, a psychologist, dietician and other services once constructed. Work on site also encompasses the construction of facilities for support services including administration and waiting areas, ambulance quarters and parking bays, overnight accommodation for paediatric mothers, a mortuary, kitchen and dining area, stores and maintenance area. Port Nolloth, located along the Atlantic Ocean, is one of the most remote areas of South Africa with a population of just over 6 000. It is served by a small government clinic that offers a community-oriented primary health care programme that monitors and works towards the improved health and well-being of families in that area. The progress on the project is currently at 70 percent. The contractor has been busy with installation of roofing in some of the buildings as well as internal plastering, painting and external work like paving, lighting and parking areas. The project has created decent job opportunities. A majority of these jobs were reserved for the local community and a lot of the work on site, such as glass fittings and cladding at the reception and waiting areas, were performed by local sub-contractors. The IDT is an entity of the National Department of Public Works and supports all spheres of government with social infrastructure management and programme implementation.