
Vuk’uzenzeleTel: 012 473 0089 Email: vukuzenzele@gcis.gov.zaAddress: Private Bag X745,  Pretoria, 0001Head of Editorial and Production  Tasneem Carrim  |  tasneem@gcis.gov.zaEditor-in-ChiefZanele Mngadi | zanelemngadi@gcis.gov.zaManaging EditorOngezwa Mogotsi ongezwa@gcis.gov.zaNews Editor Noluthando Motswai Writers  More Matshediso, Jauhara KhanSilusapho NyandaSenior Designer | Tendai Gonese Junior Designer  | Tsholofelo Sepeng Language Practitioners  Nomgcibelo Motha  Boitumelo PhalatsePhakamani Dadlanais published by Government Communications (GCIS)Vuk’uzenzeleAll rights reserved.  Reproduction of the newspaper in whole or in part without  written  permission is strictly prohibited.
Distributed by: Printed by:“I give students an opportunity because I remember being a student and broke… This is my way of giving others an opportunity.” WOMEN'S MONTHYoung chef cooking her  way to the topMore Matshediso Unlike many new ly-qualified chefs who opt to work for a hotel or a restaurant, Leigh-Ann Modise decid ed to spice things up and open her own business, named Cumin, the seed of a warm-climate herb that is popular in Latin Ameri can, Middle Eastern, Afri can and Indian cuisine.
The 22-year-old said the main goal of her business is to influence healthy eating across South African homes, including in rural areas. Cumin offers a range of services, including cooking lessons, catering for intimate events, providing a chef to cook private meals and weekly meal preparations for individuals who either want to lose or gain weight.
“All menu items for occa sions are designed around client specifications to give their palate the ultimate sat isfaction,” explained Modise, who completed her Culinary Arts Degree from the In ternational Hotel School in Johannesburg in 2018, where she also obtained her Food Preparation Diploma. She has always been passion ate about cooking and remem bers making her first omelette when she was just four, which explains why she did not wait to graduate to start Cumin, initially as a food blog but to day a registered business with a team of five qualified chefs.
In addition, Cumin sub-con tracts students whenever it has big events. “I give stu dents an opportunity because I remember being a student and broke… This is my way of giving others an opportunity,” she said.  Although her business is only kicking off, Modise is already making a name for herself. She contributed to Mogau Seshoene’s cookbook The Lazy Makoti’s Guide to the Kitchen as an assistant chef and has cooked for the Ambassa dor of France to South Africa, Christophe Farnaud, and his diplomatic guests in celebra tion of Africa Month in 2018.
She was also the head chef for the French Consulate’s annual Bastille Day celebration in Jo hannesburg.
“That was the biggest num ber of people I have ever cooked for… there were about 500 guests,” she said.
She disagrees with the idea that eating healthy is expen sive and adds that you can have a full healthy meal just by preparing your own food at home.
“People in rural areas and townships can grow their own vegetables which are also organic foods and are  a cheaper way to eat healthy,” she said.
Chef Leigh-Ann Modise with her favourite vegetables and fish meal.
study began. Today, she holds a PhD in Space Physics.
“I developed a love for physics while in my first year; that is when I got to better un derstand the physical science concepts I was taught in high school,” she said.  She was fortunate enough to get a National Student Fi nancial Aid Scheme loan that paid for her undergraduate studies, before being granted a SANSA bursary.
She joined SANSA in 2016 as a space science researcher.
Although her job is a bit mul ti-faceted and she has worked on a number of research projects, Dr Nndanganeni is currently researching the impact that space weather has on aviation.
Space weather refers to the changing conditions on the sun and in space that can influence the performance of the technology we use on Earth.
“We look at important areas in aviation, such as how space weather impacts communica tion in the aviation industry, navigation of aircraft and the impact of radiation in space,” she explained.  Dr Nndanganeni is based at the regional warning centre in Hermanus in the Western Cape.
She encourages young peo ple to consider a career in space science because there are many opportunities, thanks to the Fourth Indus trial Revolution.
“Over and above the careers that are already available at SANSA, there will always be a need to innovate new technology and develop new ways of doing things. That means we will always need professionals who can make this possible,” she said.  Dr Nndanganeni advised young people interested in a career in space research to take up mathematics and physical science as main sub jects in high school.