
Vuk’uzenzeleTel: (+27) 12 473 0089 E-mail: vukuzenzele@gcis.gov.zaAddress: Private Bag X745,  Pretoria, 0001Head of Editorial and Production  Tasneem Carrim  |  tasneem@gcis.gov.zaEditor-in-ChiefRoze Moodley | roze@gcis.gov.zaManaging EditorOngezwa Mogotsi ongezwa@gcis.gov.zaNews Editor Noluthando Motswai Writers  More Matshediso, Jauhara KhanSilusapho NyandaSenior DesignerTendai Gonese Language Practitioners  Nomgcibelo Motha  Boitumelo PhalatsePhakamani Dadlanais published by Government Communications (GCIS)Vuk’uzenzeleAll rights reserved.  Reproduction of the newspaper in whole or in part without  written  permission is strictly prohibited.
Distributed by: Printed by:gOOD gREEN DEEDSA clean environment is a money spinner in Ga-RankuwaSilusapho NyandaA clean environment is not only great for the future, but can be a money spinner in the present with waste man agement having an estimated market value of R15 billion.
The business of waste picking is helping feed families across the country. Ga-Rankuwa resident Godfrey Motshwane says he picks waste as a way of earning money for himself.
The waste picker sells his waste at Eco Care, a waste management company in Ga-Rankuwa.
Motshwane says he makes about R120 per day from collecting waste.
He collects waste in the form of plastic and cardboard. “I sell about four times a day to Eco Care. The material I collect is plastic and cardboard,” he said.
The waste he collects helps to keep his township clean from litter, he says the neighbour-hood appreciates his services.  “When I collect the waste from people’s yards they are happy and welcoming as I am cleaning up for them at no cost to them,” he said.
Owner of Eco Care Waste Management, Lerato Makube, said the buyback centre buys the waste from waste collectors.
Those selling waste at the centre are paid based on the size of the waste they collect.
She said the community in the area had become more aware of the need to recycle. “The business has had a developmental impact on this community. People who did not know about waste collection have started collecting waste," said Makube.
She said her  business not only employs 11 permanent employees but has sparked a curiosity in the community about recycling.
“There is always going to be waste and people need to start viewing waste as a commodi-ty,”Makube told Vuk’uzenzele.
Her business has been in the township since 2018.
“I got into this business because of the opportunity to green our community. We collect solid waste material for recycling which otherwise would have ended up in the landfill sites,” she said. Makube's business is in line with government’s plan to divert waste away from landfills. The business has begun teaching its waste pickers on how to separate the different waste categories. “ People  seeing waste as a resource,” she said.
Good Green DeedsMeanwhile, President Cyril Ramaphosa has launched the Good Green Deeds programme with a special focus on the importance of a clean environment.
Research conducted by the Department of Envirnomental Affairs in 2017,  found that at least 75 percent of South Africa’s waste is being landfilled and minimal waste is managed through the reduce, reuse, recycle and recovery plan.
As part of teaching and advocating the importance of a clean environment, government  is encouraging for  South Africans to take part in the Good Green Deeds programme, by keeping their communities clean.
You have the power to stop climate changeSilusapho Nyandaglobal warming is a reality that is no longer being denied but many people are still not informed on the issues relating to the environment.
There are many myths sur rounding climate change and the importance of living green.
Lutfiyah Suliman, a Project Manager at the Wildlife & Environment Society of South Africa  a non-governmental organisation advocating against pollution and global warming, says that people neglect the environment in different ways such as:
poor natural resource extraction methods; • the use of nonrenewable resources which pollute land, air and water; • wasteful production and consumption; 
poor waste disposal and creation of large amounts of waste materials which take many years to break down, such as plastic.
"The act of not taking care of our environment leads to climate change," Sulima said.
The effects of climate change vary affecting rainfall, the periods of seasons, the ability to plough in particular areas and seasons.
“Climate change affects global weather patterns and results in extremes of temperature, especially extreme hot temperatures in places that previously did not experience such high temperatures,” she said.
Suliman said this was felt most by poorer communities, where the means to adapt to and resist these changes were not widespread.
According to the environmentalist, the situation can be remedied by actively seeking  knowledge that can equip them to understand who and what is having a negative effect on the quality of the air, water and land around them,” she said.
Suliman told Vuk’uzenzele that the environment could be protected by “behavioural changes”. She said: “Being more conscious of consumption habits, buying less and reusing more, recycling where possible, and acting as a community to ensure environmental injustices are followed up on and resolved,” said Suliman.
She called on people to use the available resources such as buyback centres in order to reduce, reuse and recycle waste.
March Edition 2 Godfrey Motshwane picks waste as a way of making a living.