NA

More Matshediso

More than nine million learners across South African public schools are tuck- ing into their school work thanks to a government pro- gramme that ensures their bellies are full of nutritious food. Through the National School Nutrition Programme (NSNP) the Department of Basic Education (DBE) has exceeded its goal of providing meals to about 75 percent of the country’s learners.
NSNP director Neo Rakwena
said 20 619 schools prepare and serve school meals to approximately 9 032 622 learners across the country each day.
“Many children come from poor households that struggle to put food on the table, and for some learners, the school meal is the only meal they have in a day. School meals contribute to learning capacity, concentration and class participation,” she said.
She said schools that have
been excluded from the pro- gramme should approach district offices if they want to come on board.
In the 2015/16 financial year, about R5 703 billion was allo- cated to the programme.
Rakwena said the amount spent on the programme is adjusted annually to cover inflation, and the budget for 2017/18 is around R6.4 billion.
The programme intends to
alleviate short-term hunger and contribute to the well-be-ing of learners.
School enrolment and learner attendance are also improving as a result of the feeding pro- gramme.
Recently, Cabinet approved the publication of the Report on the Evaluation of the NSNP compiled by the Department of Planning, Monitoring and Evaluation (DPME). It outlines successes and steps that can be taken to improve the initiative. DPME Director for Evalua- tion Jabu Mathe, said the main aim of the evaluation was to assess whether the NSNP is being implemented in a way that is likely to result in sig- nificant health and education benefits for learners.
He reiterated that the overall
aim of the programme is to improve the health and nu- tritional status of the poorest learners in South Africa. The programme targets all learn- ers in quintile 1 to 3 public schools, which equates to 60 percent of the poorest schools in South Africa.
The programme also helps
with alleviating poverty in communities through job creation.
“The evaluation found that
the NSNP provides opportu- nities to over 50 000 voluntary food handlers annually to cook for learners, and they earn a stipend of R960 per month,” said Mathe.
“This translates to R576 mil- lion a year in stipends which benefit community members.” The programme also stim- ulates economic activity as small, medium and micro-en- terprises and co-operatives benefit as service providers in those provinces with decentralised procurement (KwaZulu-Natal, Gauteng, Mpumalanga and the North- ern Cape).
“Local sourcing of vegetables
has the potential to benefit schools and communities and stimulate local agriculture.” The report also revealed that the Western Cape, Mpuma- langa, Gauteng, Eastern Cape, Northern Cape and North West provinces have best implemented the programme over the years.